>> Hello and welcome to
the Haskell Weekly podcast.
This is a show about Haskell, a purely
functional programming language.
I'm your host Taylor Fausak.
I'm the Director of Software
Engineering at ACI Learning.
With me today is Cameron Gera,
one of the engineers on my team.
Thanks for joining me today, Cam.
>> Thanks for having me, Taylor.
It's been a minute since
we got the podcast.
So I'm excited to be back today.
Uh, have a good little chat and just,
uh, spend some quality time together.
You know, it's good stuff.
>> Yeah, it has been awhile.
I'm looking forward to it today.
What are we going to be talking about?
>> Well, yeah, we're going to
be talking about something that's the
unnamed, known way of, uh, avoiding
deeply nested error handling code.
So, uh, if you're familiar with Haskell
at all, uh, you've probably written
a function or multiple functions
that have two, three, four layers of
nestedness just to get the correct
error message tossed up through the top.
And so.
You know, this blog post by Gabriel
Gonzalez is talking about a way to take
advantage of either, uh, to, you know,
avoid some of that as well as do notation.
So, uh, you know, I'm gonna shoot my
best shot here and try to name it.
Uh, there's two names I have.
So we have the  blah,
excuse me, advantageous.
Yeah.
Wow.
I can't speak today.
Advantageous do notation as one or
erroneous do notation as the other.
So, you know, for those on
Reddit, Twitter: Yo, vote.
>> We'll start a poll.
>> See who wants to,
who wants to take that on?
Um, yeah, just a thought I could be
wrong too, but, uh, yeah, we're going
to just talk more about that today.
Um, which is something
we've come across ourselves.
>> Yeah,  I wanted to talk about
this one today, because like you
mentioned, this is something we come
across in our code base frequently.
And it's been a difficult refactoring to
suggest because there isn't a name for it.
You can't say, Oh, you should, extract
a function here or, you know, whatever.
And for the benefit of our listeners,
the pattern we're talking about,
which you touched on already, is
this increasing indentation when
you're handling different cases.
So very frequently for us,
that happens when you're
casing on a maybe or an either.
And in one of the two branches, all you
want to do is throw an exception and
basically stop reporting at that point.
Or stop moving forward.
So if you'll do like, case some maybe
of; nothing, throw some error; just
some value, carry on with that value.
And if you do that a couple of
times, you get really nested.
And I'm saying "throw an exception."
For us, in our application that we
work on, we're in a monad where we
can throw exceptions, but the same
principle can be applied to eithers
or maybes or any number of things.
So it doesn't necessarily
involve exceptions.
>> Right, right.
And you know, there's nothing
against super nested case statements.
Like that's not what we're
getting against here.
We're just trying to say,
there's some other way.
There's a better way for readability and
maintainability long-term . So that's
the only reason we're recommending this.
And this is a good pattern, I think for
Haskell developers to grow in, because it
can get really frustrating and confusing
when you're trying to trace down the
exact, what's happening at each case.
And so, you know, he's, he's of kind
of lean into the, either in this
blog post, and we'll kind of probably
piggyback off of that as well as relate
it back to what we do on a day to day.
But the big idea is the do notation
allows you to short circuit more or
less when you give it a, an error case
or an exception case to some degree.
Um, and so what he uses is the ability to,
uh, throw that as he's trying to validate
a string, that it should be an age, um,
and should they be alive or not alive?
Um, So that is his kind of
leading motivating example here.
And you know, his first one
is nested to the third degree.
I would say a fourth degree.
Like there's quite a few there's
we'll just say there's three
layers of left you can get to.
And so what he tries to do is extract
that out and say, all right, if we're
going to be not be able to read.
The age, we just need to say
here's, it's an invalidated.
Just don't even try anymore of the code.
Uh, you know, and then so much, you
know, same with the Boolean values.
Is it alive or not alive?
So there's really, honestly it
brings the code down to like
three separate login logic steps.
Right.
You want to first check?
Is that the age a valid
string and is their age.
Greater than zero.
And then are they alive?
And like, that's, you know, the
three logical concepts that need
to be part of this validation.
So I think it separates it really nice.
Um,
>> Yeah, that's one of the things
that I think this, uh, this is very
explicit, but, um, or this explicit form
of pattern matching on of these values
is clear when you're stepping through
it, but it also kind of muddles the
overall structure of what you're doing
in the function, because you have to each
time there's a case you have to like.
Figure out and keep in mind.
Okay.
There's two or more branches
that I have to deal with here.
So when I'm reading the code,
I have to keep that in mind.
And I don't know if I read one
branch first and it's really long.
I still have to, when I get to the next
one, kind of like pop my mental stack
and go back to the next one or go back.
And that clearly it gets harder.
The more cases are nested with each other.
Cause you have to keep more on that
mental stack, ready to pop off.
Um, and so that's like my,
um, that's pragmatically.
I think why I like this uh refactoring
technique to remove this layer of
nesting, but also, uh, just kind of
aesthetically code that increasingly
indents is a lot more difficult to
read because you have, if you keep to a
particular line length, whether that's 80
or 120 or whatever, um, you know, you're
eating into that line length budget.
As you make more of these cases.
And some people may argue
that that's a good thing.
You shouldn't have this many nested cases.
And that is your programming language
pushing back on you and saying, you
know, break these out into separate
functions, do something different.
Um, but in this case, usually
it's pretty straightforward.
Like if you had a flow chart at each
point, you'd say, if something goes
wrong, you know, go to this error state.
And I think that is captured in this
pattern very well that he describes here.
>> Yeah, I think it was, yeah.
It's something for us.
We've, you know, had code go through
code review and we're like, Oh yeah.
Let's, you know, this
is a lot of nestedness.
How can we resolve this?
Uh, and so with time, you know, we we've
started to have the mental note of,
Oh, let's just choose to take advantage
of the monad we're in with the do
notation and short circuit, because we
don't have to necessarily worry about.
Oh, what would happen even if
there was a success or whatever,
because without success, we can't
go any further, more or less.
Um,
>> And that, uh, that short
circuiting behavior that you're
describing is one of the like trademark,
uh, features of Haskell of do notation
is you can, I think it's often billed
as the programmable semi-colon.
So like, you get to decide
what happens for each line
and your do notation and for.
Maybe, and either when those are used
in do notation, the behavior is short
circuit on nothing or left respectively.
>> Right.
And for us, we've, you know, worked
on short-circuiting in, uh, with
maybes, but adding, turning that
maybe into an either with some sort
of error message so we can, uh, you
know, Have some sort of information
of what happened or what went wrong.
And so, you know, we've created our,
our functions name, note, um, just
takes a string and a maybe value.
And we'll either give you that
value or give you a left or give
you a right that value or a left.
Um, and so, you know, that's very
similar to his, uh, or die function.
I believe that he mentions in here,
>> Yeah,
>> um,
>> Yeah it's a good way to
like decorate extra information,
because I think for us, a lot of the
times we use functions that return.
A maybe because for that particular
function, there's only one
obvious way that it can fail.
So there's no sense in having it
return, you know, a descriptive message.
So as an example, like
if you want to parse.
A string into a number.
If you can't do that, then
really the only reason why is
that it's not a valid number.
There's not many other cases that
go on, but if you want to parse
it, parse a string into a number,
and then also validate that that
number, meet some other criteria.
Suddenly you need to note
hint hint something additional
about that, uh, error case.
So that's where we use note to
turn a, maybe into an either.
>> Yeah, and I think it's been
really helpful, um, as we move forward,
but we've talked a lot about case
expressions here with, you know, just,
or nothing turning those into eithers
there's also the, uh, some helpful
functions that allow you to short
circuit on, uh, a sort of particular
failure case in a monadic way.
So, um, there's.
Guard, when, unless that allow
you to give it some predicate.
And if that predicate fails, it will do
this thing, which if it's short circuit
left and that's what it will do, and
it will exit out of your function.
So.
Um, you know, there's also those options.
Uh, there was, you know, in, in the
example, I think he's already gotten
some comments on Reddit about it as well.
Um, just of using an if to return,
you know, if it was true, it would.
Return on a failure, but if not, it would
return uh just pure, or return unit.
Um, which isn't the
worst thing in the world.
But, um, there are other options
too, that allow you to short circuit,
maybe in a little cleaner fashion.
>> One of the things that I really
like about Haskell and refactoring
in Haskell is that you can often do,
like when you do one refactoring,
another one becomes available.
So, and this isn't just true in Haskell,
but it works very well in Haskell.
So in this case, if you refactored
one of these nested expressions
to something that says.
If some condition, then you throw an error
or return left or return nothing else.
pure unit, that thing is
really easy to change into.
Well, instead use the helper function when
and say, when that predicate throw the
error and then there's no else case it's
not, you don't have to think about it.
And then if your condition is the other
way around, if it's inverted, you can say,
unless some condition throw some error.
Uh, for us, we have found that.
When is a lot nicer to use
than unless on our team.
It's, it's pretty much use when,
unless you have a good reason not to.
>> Oh, I see what you did there
with, unless yeah, I think it's just.
When it, when it flips to the logic and
the predicate, it gets confusing to use
unless, so we've opted generally to use
when not, or when not equal to, rather
than unless equal to or unless the value.
>> Yeah.
And the other one that you mentioned
guard is a helper function.
I think it's not built on top of monads
directly, but uses a related, uh, type
class called monad plus and monad plus
has the concept of something called mzero.
And this is usually thought of as
like the monadic version of a monoid.
So you have mzero and you have mplus
which behave very similarly to.
mempty and mappend, um, and mzero
often is implemented as fail.
And so this all sounds kind of crazy,
but it's often used to implement
parsers where you say, try this or try
this and, or, and then you can connect
them together using mplus, and then
you're like fall back case is mzero.
>> Yeah.
>> And, and I mention all that
because guard has the downside of, if
you use it to check in one direction
and then throw an error, if the guard
fails or the error you're going to get
is usually useless because mzero doesn't
carry around any particular information.
It just means, Hey, something went wrong.
Um, which means you might have
to flip the conditional in
your guard so that it succeeds.
And then you, uh, I don't
know, it gets a little tricky.
Same problem as when and unless you
have to kind of like invert your, uh,
the way you want to make the check.
>> Yeah.
So, I mean, the nice thing is there's a
lot of ways to kind of solve this problem.
Um, you know, cause there's if statements
which when, and unless do really well
with as well as guard, am I correct?
Am I wrong on that?
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
Uh, guards work well, or, sorry.
Did you mean guard the function or guards?
The language feature.
>> The function, what
we're speaking about today.
>> The function works.
All right.
I personally would recommend, and
I prefer to use when instead of
unless or guard, but they all end
up doing basically the same thing.
>> Gotcha.
And those more or less replace if
statements, um, that have no drastic
difference in between the cases
or something along those lines.
>> Yeah.
Uh, I think lisp languages often call
these like one armed conditionals or
something like that, because normally
when you write an if, uh, expression,
you have to say what to do, if it's true
and what to do, if it's false, but when
you write something using when, or unless
you only have to specify what to do when.
You know, one, one side of that condition.
>> That's one of
the nifty things about it.
One arm conditionals.
That's good to know.
>> I hope I got that.
Right.
I haven't programmed in a lisp in a while.
Um, but yeah, we were talking
about what to name this thing
because, uh, Gabe mentions that.
He doesn't have a name for this trick,
even though it's a pretty common
one and we have the same experience.
We don't have a name for this, even though
we recommend it in code review frequently.
And I liked the names that you gave.
Um, my favorite was erroneous do notation.
So that, that gets my vote for
what we should call this trick.
>> Easier to say it too.
So, you know, it's got that going for it.
>> You got to have
things that are easy to say.
>> Yeah.
We could do some alliteration
maybe, but I don't know.
>> Dubious do notation.
>> Well then what
you got notation in there.
So you're of SOL.
>> Oh yeah.
Yeah.
I don't know.
I'll have to think on that.
>> Yeah.
Okay.
>> Listeners, if you
have any ideas, let us know.
We'd be happy to, uh, to shill
them on our podcast here.
>> For sure!
We are trying to impact the
Haskell community for the better.
So,
>> By giving things names.
>> Hey, in development, naming
things are one of the hardest things.
So, you know, nomenclature
is not arbitrary.
Very very challenging sometimes.
But yeah, I mean, I think overall
it's a great post by Gabe.
Really appreciate him
putting this out there.
Um, you know, as a community we're
trying to grow and find, you know,
and share the knowledge we all have.
So, um, if you're newer to
Haskell and haven't really heard
of this before, It's awesome.
We definitely go check out the link
in the bio or whatever we post.
These links show notes.
There we go.
Um, that way you can read it for yourself
and kind of see what the example looks
like and may be able to apply it yourself.
>> Yeah.
And I just also want to add that.
I really appreciate, um, Gabe taking
the time to write posts like this,
for things that are kind of, um,
tribal knowledge where a lot of the
community, and especially the more
experienced people in the community
are already familiar with this pattern,
but there hasn't been a name for it.
There's no authoritative.
Resource that I can point people
to and say, Hey, like do this.
Here's an explanation of why it's a
good thing or just what's going on.
Um, and he also posted another
thing recently about, uh, proxy
arguments and type applications.
And I think these are good
intermediate level resources.
And I really liked that he's taken
the time to write this stuff and I
encourage everyone else who knows
these types of things to write
their own posts, describing these
things because they're great.
>> Go intermediate Haskell!
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, uh, that was all the
notes I had for this one.
Cam, do you have anything else?
>> Uh, no, no I'm excited
that we got to talk about it.
And, uh, looking forward to next week.
>> Yeah, next week.
We'll we'll definitely record
every week from here on out.
>> We say that
>> every Every time.
Alright.
Y'all well, thanks so much for
listening to the Haskell weekly podcast.
I have been your host Taylor Fausak.
And with me today was Cameron Gera.
If you want to find out more about
us, you can check out our website,
which is HaskellWeekly.News.
>> Haskell Weekly is brought
to you by ITProTV, an ACI learning
company, and also our employer.
They would like to offer you 30% off
the lifetime of your subscription.
At ITPro.TV by using promo code
HaskellWeekly30 at checkout.
So that's 30% off all
kinds of it training.
So check it out.
If you're interested, check, uh,
we also have free membership,
so that's also an option.
Uh, but I think that about
does it for us today.
Taylor, thanks for joining us
on the Haskell Weekly podcast
and we'll see you next week.
>> Bye!